---
# Paul and Sanaye Okamura Oral History Interview Transcript 3 
--- 

00:06 
He was only 15. So of course like in my family why then Mom was able to send all the kids to school  and everything were basically in pulse family Paul was a sole supporter he was he had taken place with  his dad. And so their life has been in that respect has been mo harder perhaps than they had both parents. 

00:38 
Did your family's originally work on the railroad in Pocatello or did they come here to farm and what  made them choose Pocatello? 

00:48 
The railroad, I think you were a little while in California. But in those days, there were a lot Orientals  working for the railroad. And however, my father didn't work for the railroad. Oh, I don't know, couple of  years or so. And then he said, started a little garden on the edge of town. And as a town grew, he had  quit his little gardening project moved farther out away from the city and went into general farming too.  And it was in 1927 I think he moved to back a little closer town when it's strictly mostly into truck  farming. And he had about 80 acres that he had all in garden produce. Then he bought when stuff was  out of season he would buy from other sources other places and then resell it to his service. Or I think  he had he had about 80 by AD customers around because there were a lot of little neighborhood stores  back in those days in a lot of smaller restaurants and that he called on each one of them once a day, at  least he had he had two or three trucks that the people working for him and that he made all the stops  just about every day. What type of things did you do over time? What type of things did he deliver what  types of all kinds of garden produce and then he would have some citrus that T would have shipped in?  Were there other Japanese in the same business? Model? No, 

03:10 
no at that time where your mind is. 

03:15 
When I first started he was by himself but in a few years there was another Japanese family and a  Chinese family also. Yeah, it was teaching during the war see? 

03:41 
Before return I think I talked to him about 55 to 76 or seven. So it's quite so it was after the word  because it was playing around like port forward what were your recollections of the area when during  the war at that time I was living in Utah

04:14 
basically, the part of Utah we were living in was about the same as it was around here. I didn't notice  anything in particular there were small incidences you know, that happen that you hear people telling  about but really lived in Idaho. I was gonna ask you about your family. Well, with like everybody, my  brothers and sisters. Sure. I have a brother who is next to me, who is the Doctor of Veterinary Medicine  has been at Penn State now for about 20 some odd years. And then I have a sister who's lives closest  to us. She lives out You're dying on the ranch. And she was library and bar at one of the hospitals  booked a reasonable number of years. And her my brother in law was married to me. Graduated from  Ames, Iowa as ag engineer, major, and since that time he has been on this school board to his farm.  But in the meantime, he's been on the school board and then he was on a county commissioner for  about a year for Bannock County. My next sister is married to Ben karate, who was well Ben was noted  for a tail gunner during World War Two. And he finished his schooling after after the war, and  journalism and had the Williamston paper for many, many years. And then he went down to vendor and  worked as Sunday editor for the vendor free breath. My system and moving time, worked off so far  Ventura free breads, but she was kind of like a society editor for The Williamson paper. And then my  youngest brother was a doctor, but we lost him about six years ago, and he was an internist or maybe  the encounter. Say in my I have the daughter who was living in Long Beach and has four children.  She's married to a civil engineer who works at Mattel has worked there for over 20 years. I'm 25 years  perhaps. And they have four children. Justin has graduated from long State Long Beach State and is  working as an insurance not just what kind of world he's running into. He's in insurance, real estate.  And then my next daughter, second daughter, Mitzi is married to electrical engineer and worked for  Boeing. Well, he has worked for the government. Yes, and he worked for the state and city of Seattle.  And then, but he's now back at Boeing. They have three children, and they Oh, this is someone we've  really been proud of. He graduated from MIT, and went back afterwards, you can serve on yours. He  went back and graduated from Wharton this spring. And then I have a granddaughter there is going to  school and finishing up at Ellensburg in nutrition, and John is just right now in college, and then I have  the sun ray. And Grace. He's the cowboy and a family man out there country town for all these years,  but he loves horses. So you really need a real cowboy. Yes, real cowboy lives on a farm and passport  says and they go rodeoing all the time. That's that's his main stay. But he teaches math and English in  grace High School loves the teaching part. But I think he loves horses more. And I always thought that,  you know, when when he was little whenever he saw blood, he would just pass out my that was the first  time he gets hurt riding the horse that's going to cure him. But it did. Oh, he's got all these scrapes and  they were they on him and he still keeps going I'm this year gone down to over for the rodeo that they  have been window over your mouth. And I guess did alright yeah me the last last two years he's won  the saddle and won the championship for all time rodeo, you know in Wendover, so I guess that's going  to be is a hobby that he'll never give up. Be willing to get squared away when he gets too old. They'll  have to but right now he's still in that family stays in the family. And so now my grandson went on a  mission to Japan came back and it looks like he's just picking it up and following along with his dad. So  he's going to Utah State and he will be in Japan. In two years, so be about 2121 22. 

10:08 
So you said earlier that you had like a United Nations of religions in your family might you tell us all  about

10:14 
we have mom who is a Buddhist, and then goes on both sides of the family we have a sister whose is  Catholic in Hawaii, and then to be sisters and their families are LDS. And then on my side of the family,  I have strong lbs because my sister and her all of her family have been, you know, sent their children  on missions and things. And my son married now they asked girl from Salt Lake so he has been LDS  now for several years. And I have a couple of methods. One daughter is quite strong. There's not quite  so but they are. They've been baptized. 

11:05 
I heard overheard speaking before about how the Japanese generations of generations and the  families are becoming less and less Japanese. Soon, you pursued a day where you might have a blond  haired blue eyed granddaughter or grandson something like that. Can you speak 

11:26 
about that a little bit? Well, I think it's wonderful. And to the extent that the the races have been able to  mix them and be a cohesive group, you know, I always thought that when I when I was younger, I had a  friend who was Caucasian and I it was a very dear friend, because we live he just lived down the street  aways and and if something came up, and he proposed to me, I still as much as I thought of him, I  wouldn't have thought of marrying him because at the time Caucasians were you know, and Japanese  married just just didn't go and they had all these laws to that, that regulated us from so since that time,  it's really been almost a complete turnover and because we have children and I on his side of the  famine and mine too, who are married to Caucasians and dying very nicely and I think I think just as  much as the daughter in law's is if you know if they were Japanese and I think the grandchildren  naturally they're just your grandkids are just extra special. And like you say we've got blonde and darn  near blonde, blue eyes and curly hair. You know, I said I'm, I've often wondered how mother would  think if she saw curly hair, granddaughter or grandchild, because in all in Japanese always have  straight black hair. And here we have our grandchildren who have pretty curly brown hair and beautiful  all his complexion and everything. And somehow I feel like that the offsprings of an inner marriage, the  children seem to be stronger and healthier, better and stature. They're taller. They're better looking.  They're much more intelligent in school. I mean, all the children, you know, I've done very well on  school. So far, so they always talk about hybrids, you know, the first strain of a hybrid being so good,  whether it's wheat or corn or whatever. I kind of think that what children to my I don't know what our  next year I'm afraid that like I say, you know, the next generation our great great grandchildren now will  become more Caucasian, and I'm having to lose begin to lose the Japanese features. But down 

14:22 
Excuse me, how come oriental and Caucasian marriages are not only accepted but welcomed. Yeah, I  mean, very, very much a part of the Society of Black and Caucasian because both sets are mixing  races. 

14:44 
Yes, that's right. And yes, I have never thought of that. Because I've seen a lot of black mixed black  and white marriages that were the the girls are the offspring. I have been beautiful children. And but  um, it's just like the same way with Japanese and man, but I don't know why other than one at one time, you know, I was visiting with a professor about mixed marriages and mad and I said something to  him about the Japanese have, I said, we've been fortunate because we have more or less been  accepted. And and many times when they talk about race, we used to always put down yell, you know,  because we're just Japanese. And I thought Japanese are shallow. Well, the last census or something  we were talking about weren't concerned race. They, they classify us as white. And I said, Oh, how  come and and they said, Well, one thing is that they thought that this person, this may have been just  one person's opinion. But he said he thought was because the race, the Japanese race itself,  conducted themselves in such a way that they were acceptable to everyone, you know, we weren't late,  we weren't classified as a lazy race. We weren't. And most of them are quite investors, we, we and we  believe in education. You know, that type of thing. And I just, I don't know, to really tell you the truth. I  have no idea. Other than just thinking about different things myself by 

16:40 
I think we've more or less stayed pretty much in the background, especially those of us in the inner  mountain area, I think, more than than over on the West Coast. And I think generally we tried to not be  arrogant. I think that's helped. Then, as I said, Before, I think we it's funny thing, you go over to the west  coast, where there is a large congregation of, of our people. I've noticed that down there. Since I went  to a convention in 1934, in San Francisco. I went to a barbershop. It was must have been a real pop  your barbershop because it was full of people that no one would speak to me. No, we're all Japanese  Americans. Now, if that had been back here, and that's the situation was reversed. Because we speak  to if we think they're Japanese, whether we know him or not, we say hello to him, you know, but they wouldn't, they just totally ignored me, which, well, that's the way they do things down here. However,  but in living here, we've been lot more sociable among all people. So but I think that's one part of the  Japanese culture that I really, that stays with me is to remember your obligations. you befriend me  today, or do me a favor. Don't forget it. Remember? And I think the younger people today are going the  opposite direction from that. Not that I guess they don't care, but they just don't take the time to think  about I think, 

19:13 
Amanda look at it in a different aspect. I think it's partly our fault because we haven't taught them and  made them aware of it. You know, sometimes. There are a lot of things I've learned even dents ball and  I have been married through my through I've lost my mother early. So I didn't have the advantage of  having a mother close by as I've gotten older. But now mother has made me aware of a lot of things  that I shouldn't do or should remember to do. That. My mother never got around to teaching us when  we were younger because the occasion never rose, I guess, you know, and it seems like that's the way  a lot Other things that we do we learn when we face up to problem and we will say, Well, how are you  know, how is that going to affect us? Or how do we take care of that situation? And I think a lot of it, I  feel at times when I haven't done something that that bothers me, I think, Oh, I was on the way my fault  because I didn't teach kids that I that this is one thing you know, another thing you should remember to  do, or why don't you do this when this comes up or something like that, but not being there and being  together? I mean, that makes a difference to 

20:45
her mother. And Father, and like my mother and father. You did something for them. They never didn't  forget it. We say, Well, they did this for us. Today. We got to remember to try and show our  appreciation to the scene. Well, they didn't only say it they saw that it was done that way. So they didn't  because my mother now if you take her a piece of candy, they give you two pieces from 

21:27 
whether you want it or not. 

21:34 
Okay,
